README.md, before:

# Vulnerability Management Lab Project with Nessus
## Objective

- Prepare Nessus Vulnerability Management Scanner
- Prepare Client Virtual Machine
- Perform Basic Scan against the Windows 10 VM
- Setup the VM To Accept Authenticated Scans 
- Perform Vulnerability Scan after providing credentials to Nessus
- Compare and Remediate Vulnerabilities
- Verify Remediations

### Environments and Technologies Used:

- Nessus Essentials
- VMware Workstation Player
- MS Windows 10 ISO
- Virtual Machine

<details close>

<div>

</summary>

#### In this lab, we make concerted efforts to scan for vulnerabilities in the system and perform remediation processes in order to lower susceptibility. <b>

## Prepare Nessus Vulnerability Management Scanner
1. Download and install VMWare player.
2. Download Window 10 ISO
3. Download, install Nessus on local machine after registering and receiving activation code.
![Download and install Nessus](./images/download-nessus.png)
![Download and install Nessus](./images/download-nessus1.png)
![Download and install Nessus](./images/download-nessus2.png)
4. Next on the installation welcome page that displays, Click connect via SSL, advanced, proceed to localhost. 
![Download and install Nessus](./images/download-nessus3.png)
![Download and install Nessus](./images/download-nessus4.png)
5. Then click next and select - Register for Nessus Essentials, then click continue. 
![Download and Install Nessus](./images/download-nessus5.png)
6. Then provide activation code from your email. Then create username and password. Next, Nessus download plugins to finish setup.
![Download and Install Nessus](./images/download-nessus6.png)
![Download and Install Nessus](./images/download-nessus7.png)
![Download and Install Nessus](./images/download-nessus8.png)
![Download and Install Nessus](./images/download-nessus9.png)
![Nessus Installation complete](./images/download-nessus10.png)

## Prepare Client Virtual Machine
1. Install and launch VMware Workstation Player on your local machine to setup Windows 10 virtual machine. Click Player → File → New Virtual Machine → Browse then select the ISO image → Next → Add the name → disk size → Next → Customize Hardware (set Memory,CPU, Network Adaptor:Bridge (so that both VM and local machine can communicate with each other)) → Finish.
![Setup VM ](./images/vm-v.png)
2. As VM launches, click next and complete the installation of Windows 10 Pro accordingly, including username and password.
![Win 10 VM Setup](./images/vm-v2.png)
![Win 10 VM Setup](./images/vm-v3.png)
![Win 10 VM Setup](./images/vm-v4.png)


## Perform Basic Scan against the Windows 10 VM
1. This first basic scan is to confirm that all the setup is in order and you can get a scan result. First we locate its IP4 address by login into the VM: In the search field on the Start bar → type CMD → ipconfig. 
![identify the IP of the Windows 10 VM](./images/ipaddress.png)

2. Ping the VM from our local machine in this case; using ```ping 10.0.0.187 -t``` to confirm if we can reach it. But it timeouts. 
![Windows 10 VM timeouts](./images/iptimeouts.png)
3. We would need to disable the internal firewall in the VM. Type wf.msc in the search bar on the VM to launch the Windows defender firewall console. To disable the firewall properties we turn off the firewall state for the Domain Profile, Private Profile and Public Profile. After this, notice that the IP pinging stops timing out showing that the VM is now reachable.
![Disable defender](./images/wf.msc.png)
![Disable defender](./images/wf.msc2.png)
![VM stops timing out](./images/VM-reachable.png)
4. Next, perform a basic scan to confirm that the settings are in order: At Nesses Essentials web portal, click New Scan → Basic Network Scan → Add Name (You can name it any name), Targets (add the IP of the windows 10 VM)  → Save. Click on the play button to launch the scan. 
![Basic network Scan](./images/BN-scan.png)
![Basic network Scan](./images/BN-scan2.png)
![Basic network Scan](./images/BN-scan3.png)
![Basic network Scan](./images/BN-scan4.png)

5. Further vulnerabilities are detected when credentials are used than the basic scan with no credentials. When the scan has finished we can click on it to display the scan results. Nessus uses colours to indicate the vulnerabilty severity level. Critical, High, Medium, Low and Info. We can also click on the Vulnerability tab next to the Host tab to see more details. We can click on each result listed, review the description and implement the suggested solution to remediate the vulnerability. Clicking the 'Target Credential Status...', from the description and output, we see that Nessus detected SMB on port 445 but no credentials were provided. SMB local checks were not enabled.
![Basic Scan result](./images/BN-scan5.png)
![Basic Scan result](./images/BN-scan6.png)
![Basic Scan result](./images/BN-scan7.png)
![Basic Scan result](./images/BN-scan8.png)

## Setup the VM To Accept Authenticated Scans
1. Next, we goto to the VM and launch the Services pane by typing services in the search bar.  Enable Remote Registry and turn it on (this will allow the scanner to connet to the VM registry and crawl to look for insecure registry information): Double click on it → Start Type: Automatic → Apply/Start → OK.
![Launch services window on VM](./images/services.png)
![enable remote registry](./images/enable-rr.png)
![enable remote registry](./images/enable-rr2.png)


## Perform Vulnerability Scan after providing credentials to Nessus
- Within Greenbone / OpenVAS, go to Scans → Tasks, CLONE the “Scan - Azure Vulnerable VMs” Task, then Edit it:
Name / Comment → “Scan - Azure Vulnerable VMs - Credentialed”, Targets: Azure Vulnerable VMs - Credentialed Scan
Save, Click the Play button to launch the new Credentialed Scan, wait for it to finish, It will take longer than the last one. Wait for it to finish, After the credentialed scan finishes, you can immediately see the difference in findings: 

## Compare and Remediate Vulnerabilities
- Check SMB Login under “Results”
Further inspect the individual vulnerabilities and see all the Criticals from the out-of-date FireFox
Remove the Filter (upper right)

## Verify Remediation
- Log back into your Win10-Vulnerable VM
Uninstall Adobe Reader, VLC Player, and Firefox
Restart the VM and Verify Remediations. 

## Conclusion
- Verify remediations and start all over from 5. till vulnerabilities report is low or at an acceptable level.

Commit message:

added enable file and printer sharing

README.md, after:

# Vulnerability Management Lab Project with Nessus
## Objective

- Prepare Nessus Vulnerability Management Scanner
- Prepare Client Virtual Machine
- Perform Basic Scan against the Windows 10 VM
- Setup the VM To Accept Authenticated Scans 
- Perform Vulnerability Scan after providing credentials to Nessus
- Compare and Remediate Vulnerabilities
- Verify Remediations

### Environments and Technologies Used:

- Nessus Essentials
- VMware Workstation Player
- MS Windows 10 ISO
- Virtual Machine

<details close>

<div>

</summary>

#### In this lab, we make concerted efforts to scan for vulnerabilities in the system and perform remediation processes in order to lower susceptibility. <b>

## Prepare Nessus Vulnerability Management Scanner
1. Download and install VMWare player.
2. Download Window 10 ISO
3. Download, install Nessus on local machine after registering and receiving activation code.
![Download and install Nessus](./images/download-nessus.png)
![Download and install Nessus](./images/download-nessus1.png)
![Download and install Nessus](./images/download-nessus2.png)
4. Next on the installation welcome page that displays, Click connect via SSL, advanced, proceed to localhost. 
![Download and install Nessus](./images/download-nessus3.png)
![Download and install Nessus](./images/download-nessus4.png)
5. Then click next and select - Register for Nessus Essentials, then click continue. 
![Download and Install Nessus](./images/download-nessus5.png)
6. Then provide activation code from your email. Then create username and password. Next, Nessus download plugins to finish setup.
![Download and Install Nessus](./images/download-nessus6.png)
![Download and Install Nessus](./images/download-nessus7.png)
![Download and Install Nessus](./images/download-nessus8.png)
![Download and Install Nessus](./images/download-nessus9.png)
![Nessus Installation complete](./images/download-nessus10.png)

## Prepare Client Virtual Machine
1. Install and launch VMware Workstation Player on your local machine to setup Windows 10 virtual machine. Click Player → File → New Virtual Machine → Browse then select the ISO image → Next → Add the name → disk size → Next → Customize Hardware (set Memory,CPU, Network Adaptor:Bridge (so that both VM and local machine can communicate with each other)) → Finish.
![Setup VM ](./images/vm-v.png)
2. As VM launches, click next and complete the installation of Windows 10 Pro accordingly, including username and password.
![Win 10 VM Setup](./images/vm-v2.png)
![Win 10 VM Setup](./images/vm-v3.png)
![Win 10 VM Setup](./images/vm-v4.png)


## Perform Basic Scan against the Windows 10 VM
1. This first basic scan is to confirm that all the setup is in order and you can get a scan result. First we locate its IP4 address by login into the VM: In the search field on the Start bar → type CMD → ipconfig. 
![identify the IP of the Windows 10 VM](./images/ipaddress.png)

2. Ping the VM from our local machine in this case; using ```ping 10.0.0.187 -t``` to confirm if we can reach it. But it timeouts. 
![Windows 10 VM timeouts](./images/iptimeouts.png)
3. We would need to disable the internal firewall in the VM. Type wf.msc in the search bar on the VM to launch the Windows defender firewall console. To disable the firewall properties we turn off the firewall state for the Domain Profile, Private Profile and Public Profile. After this, notice that the IP pinging stops timing out showing that the VM is now reachable.
![Disable defender](./images/wf.msc.png)
![Disable defender](./images/wf.msc2.png)
![VM stops timing out](./images/VM-reachable.png)
4. Next, perform a basic scan to confirm that the settings are in order: At Nesses Essentials web portal, click New Scan → Basic Network Scan → Add Name (You can name it any name), Targets (add the IP of the windows 10 VM)  → Save. Click on the play button to launch the scan. 
![Basic network Scan](./images/BN-scan.png)
![Basic network Scan](./images/BN-scan2.png)
![Basic network Scan](./images/BN-scan3.png)
![Basic network Scan](./images/BN-scan4.png)

5. Further vulnerabilities are detected when credentials are used than the basic scan with no credentials. When the scan has finished we can click on it to display the scan results. Nessus uses colours to indicate the vulnerabilty severity level. Critical, High, Medium, Low and Info. We can also click on the Vulnerability tab next to the Host tab to see more details. We can click on each result listed, review the description and implement the suggested solution to remediate the vulnerability. Clicking the 'Target Credential Status...', from the description and output, we see that Nessus detected SMB on port 445 but no credentials were provided. SMB local checks were not enabled.
![Basic Scan result](./images/BN-scan5.png)
![Basic Scan result](./images/BN-scan6.png)
![Basic Scan result](./images/BN-scan7.png)
![Basic Scan result](./images/BN-scan8.png)

## Setup the VM To Accept Authenticated Scans
1. Next, we go to the VM and launch the Services pane by typing services in the search bar. Enable Remote Registry and turn it on (this will allow the scanner to connect to the VM registry and crawl to look for insecure configurations): Double click on it → Start Type: Automatic → Apply/Start → OK → Close services pane.
![Launch services window on VM](./images/services.png)
![enable remote registry](./images/enable-rr.png)
![enable remote registry](./images/enable-rr2.png)
![remote registry enabled](./images/enable-rr3.png)

2. Ensure file and printer sharing are turned on the VM. 
![enable file & printer sharing](./images/fandpshare.png)
![enable file & printer sharing](./images/fandpshare2.png)

## Perform Vulnerability Scan after providing credentials to Nessus
- Within Greenbone / OpenVAS, go to Scans → Tasks, CLONE the “Scan - Azure Vulnerable VMs” Task, then Edit it:
Name / Comment → “Scan - Azure Vulnerable VMs - Credentialed”, Targets: Azure Vulnerable VMs - Credentialed Scan
Save, Click the Play button to launch the new Credentialed Scan, wait for it to finish, It will take longer than the last one. Wait for it to finish, After the credentialed scan finishes, you can immediately see the difference in findings: 

## Compare and Remediate Vulnerabilities
- Check SMB Login under “Results”
Further inspect the individual vulnerabilities and see all the Criticals from the out-of-date FireFox
Remove the Filter (upper right)

## Verify Remediation
- Log back into your Win10-Vulnerable VM
Uninstall Adobe Reader, VLC Player, and Firefox
Restart the VM and Verify Remediations. 

## Conclusion
Verify remediations and start all over from 5. till vulnerabilities report is low or at an acceptable level.
